add security considerations page (#432)
PureStake/moonbeam-docs: builders/get-started/eth-compare/security.md

---
title: Security Considerations
description: A description of the main differences that Ethereum developers need to understand in terms of security considerations when developing on Moonbeam.
---

# Security Considerations

![Moonbeam v Ethereum - Security Banner](/images/builders/get-started/eth-compare/security-banner.png)

## Introduction {: #introduction }

> When developing smart contracts on Moonbeam, there are some security considerations to be aware of that do not apply when developing on Ethereum. Moonbeam has several [precompiled contracts](/builders/pallets-precompiles/precompiles/){target=_blank}, which are Solidity interfaces that enable developers to access Substrate-based functionality through the Ethereum API. Although the precompiled contracts are designed to improve the developer experience, there can be some unintended consequences that must be considered.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When developing smart contracts on Moonbeam, there are some security considerations to be aware of that do not apply when developing on Ethereum. Moonbeam has several [precompiled contracts](/builders/pallets-precompiles/precompiles/){target=_blank}, which are Solidity interfaces that enable developers to access Substrate-based functionality through the Ethereum API, but circumventing the EVM. Although the precompiled contracts are designed to improve the developer experience, there can be some unintended consequences that must be considered.
```

This guide will outline and provide examples of some security considerations to be cognizant of when developing on Moonbeam.

## Arbitrary Code Execution {: #arbitrary-code-execution }

> Smart contracts can allow arbitrary code exeuction through low-level message passing to other smart contracts via the [`call()` function](https://solidity-by-example.org/call/){target=_blank}, which is an available method for the [address data type in Solidity](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/latest/types.html#address){target=_blank}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Smart contracts can allow arbitrary code execution through low-level message passing to other smart contracts via the [`call()` function](https://solidity-by-example.org/call/){target=_blank}, which is an available method for the [address data type in Solidity](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/latest/types.html#address){target=_blank}.
```

The `call()` function accepts ABI encoded call data that is then passed to the target contract. To get the encoded call data, you can use any of the [ABI encoding functions outlined in the Solidity docs](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/latest/units-and-global-variables.html#abi-encoding-and-decoding-functions){target=_blank}, including `abi.encodeWithSelector` which will be used in the examples in this guide. 

> As previously mentioned, one major concern of allowing low-level calls to arbitrarily execute code on Moonbeam is that Moonbeam has precompile contracts that can be called, which can be used to get around some protections that are typically available on Ethereum. To safely use arbitrary code execution on Moonbeam, you should consider the following, which **only applies to contracts that allow arbitrary code execution**:

Reviewer 2: To illustrate my previous point:

`arb code execution` here is a bit confusing. From this context (this paragraph), it could mean:

* code executed from a smart contract in general -- from the EVM's perspective, this is arbitrary (other than following the normal rules)
* `allowing low-level calls to arbitrarily execute code on Moonbeam` is probably nothing different than other cases, but is a lot to swallow
* code that is executed as the target of some `call` (or similar) -- I think this is mainly what this article is concerned with

I think these are really all referring to the same thing, so maybe using (1) consistent phrasing and (2) a short intro giving context to "arb code exec" and esp. that we are referring to it as a result of some `*call` would help a lot.

> - Moonbeam [precompiled contracts](builders/pallets-precompiles/precompiles/){target=_blank} such as the Native ERC-20 precompile, XC-20 precompiles, and XCM-related precompiles allow users to manage and transfer assets without requiring access to the EVM. Instead, these actions are done using the Substrate API. So, if your contract holds native tokens or XC-20s and allows arbitrary code execution, these precompiles can be used to drain the balance of the contract

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Moonbeam [precompiled contracts](builders/pallets-precompiles/precompiles/){target=_blank} such as the Native ERC-20 precompile, XC-20 precompiles, and XCM-related precompiles allow users to manage and transfer assets without requiring access to the EVM. Instead, these actions are done using the Substrate API. So, if your contract holds native tokens or XC-20s and allows arbitrary code execution, these precompiles can be used to drain the balance of the contract, bypassing any security checks that are normally enforced by the EVM
```

> - Setting a value of `0` when using the `call()` function (for example, `call{value: 0}(...)`) can be overridden by calling the native asset precompile and specifying an amount to transfer in the encoded call data

Reviewer 3: There's a small distinction that just occurred to me.

Let contract A be a contract with arbitrary code execution. Let contract B be a contract with a function that has:
`require(msg.value > 1 ether);`

Doing the following will still guarantee that the function on contract B cannot be called by contract A.
`call{value: 0}(...)`

Of course, the funds themselves are still at risk due to the precompile. Not sure if this is enough of an issue to really mention.

Reviewer: @chebii2 this is not the right place to look for support. Please contact the team via the official support channels (Telegram/Discord) which you can find in https://moonbeam.network

> - Setting a value of `0` when using the `call()` function (for example, `call{value: 0}(...)`) can be overridden by calling the native asset precompile and specifying an amount to transfer in the encoded call data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Setting the value attribute of the transaction object to a fixed amount when using the `call()` function (for example, `call{value: 0}(...)`) can be bypassed by calling the native asset precompile and specifying an amount to transfer in the encoded call data
```

- Providing the function selector for the function that you want to allow to be executed is considered safe, assuming that the function call is safe and does not call precompiles

> - Blacklisting contracts that can execute arbitrary call data is not considered safe, as other precompiles might be added in the future. Providing whitelisted contracts that can execute the arbitrary call data is considered safe, assuming that the contracts being called are not precompiles, or that in the case they are, the contract making the call does not hold the native token or any XC-20

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Blacklisting target contracts (including precompiles) in the function that executes arbitrary call data is not considered safe, as other precompiles might be added in the future. Providing whitelisted target contracts in the function that executes the arbitrary call data is considered safe, assuming that the contracts being called are not precompiles, or that in the case they are, the contract making the call does not hold the native token or any XC-20
```

In the following sections, you'll learn about each of these security considerations through examples.

### Precompiles Can Override a Set Value {: #setting-a-value }

> On Ethereum, a smart contract that allows for arbitrary code execution could force the value of a call to be `0`, guaranteeing that no amount of native currency would be sent with the transaction. Whereas on Moonbeam, setting the value of an arbitrary call to `0` can be overridden by calling the native ERC-20 precompile contract and transferring the native asset through the Substrate API. Since ERC-20s and XC-20s are not native assets, setting a value to `0` doesn't provide any protection for these types of assets on Ethereum or Moonbeam.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On Ethereum, a smart contract that allows for arbitrary code execution could force the value of a call to be a specific amount (for example, `{value: 0}`), guaranteeing that only that amount of native currency would be sent with the transaction. Whereas on Moonbeam, setting the value of an arbitrary call can be overridden by calling the native ERC-20 precompile contract and transferring the native asset through the Substrate API. Since ERC-20s and XC-20s are not native assets, setting the value attribute doesn't provide any protection for these types of assets on Ethereum or Moonbeam.
```

For example, if you have a contract that allows arbitrary code execution and you pass it encoded call data that transfers the balance of a contract to another address, you could essentially drain the given contract of it's balance.

To get the encoded call data, you could use a function like the following:

```
function getBytes(address _contract, address _to) public view returns (bytes memory) {
    // Load ERC-20 interface of contract
    IERC20 erc20 = IERC20(_contract);
    // Get amount to transfer
    uint256 amount = erc20.balanceOf(address(this));
    // Build the encoded call data
    return abi.encodeWithSelector(IERC20.transfer.selector, _to, amount);
}

> ```

Reviewer 3: In the first draft, this was within the same contract that makes the arbitrary call. That's not apparent in this case, so the balanceOf call is confusing.

It might be better to just show an attack contract snippet (untested):

```
IERC20 public anyXC20Token;

function attack(address _arbitraryCallContract, address _beneficiary) public {
    // Get amount to transfer out of vulnerable contract
    uint256 amount = anyXC20Token.balanceOf(_arbitraryCallContract);

    // Build attack call data
    bytes attackCallData = abi.encodeWithSelector(IERC20.transfer.selector, _to, amount);

    // Do attack call
    _arbitraryCallContract.makeArbitraryCall(address(anyXC20Token), attackCallData);
}
```

Author: Ah yeah I see what you're saying. I'll make this function so it can be in any contract just so it's a bit more flexible

To get the function selector to whitelist, you can [keccack256 hash](https://emn178.github.io/online-tools/keccak_256.html){target=_blank} the signature of the function.

Once you have the whitelisted function selector, you can use inline assembly to get the function selector from the encoded call data and compare the two selectors using the [require function](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/v0.8.17/control-structures.html#panic-via-assert-and-error-via-require){target=_blank}. If the function selector from the encoded call data matches the whitelisted function selector, you can make the call. Otherwise, an exception will be thrown.

```
function makeArbitraryCall(address _target, bytes calldata _bytes) public {
    // Get the function selector from the encoded call data
    bytes4 selector;
    assembly {
        selector := calldataload(_bytes.offset)
    }

    // Ensure the call data calls an approved and safe function
    require(selector == INSERT-WHITELISTED-FUNCTION-SELECTOR);

    // Arbitrary call
    (bool success,) = _target.call(_bytes);
    require(success);
}
```

### Whitelisting Safe Contracts {: #whitelisting-safe-contracts}

> By whitelisting a specific contract address that can execute arbitrary call data, it ensures that the call is considered safe, assuming that the contracts being called are not precompiles. If they are precompiles, you'll want to make sure that the contract making the call does not hold the native token or any XC-20. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By whitelisting a specific target contract address in the function that can execute arbitrary call data, you can ensure that the call is considered safe, as the EVM will enforce that only whitelisted contracts can be called. This assumes that the contracts being called are not precompiles. If they are precompiles, you'll want to make sure that the contract making the call does not hold the native token or any XC-20. 
```

> Blacklisting contracts from arbitrary code execution is not considered safe, as other precompiles might be added in the future.

Reviewer 2: We use a range for our precompiles starting with low values, so it could be feasible to blacklist the entire we might use (e.g. `0-4096` or so. We should discuss internally before documenting this as a good technique, though...

---

# Security Considerations

![Moonbeam v Ethereum - Security Banner](/images/builders/get-started/eth-compare/security/security-banner.png)

## Introduction {: #introduction }

When developing smart contracts on Moonbeam, there are some security considerations to be aware of that do not apply when developing on Ethereum. Moonbeam has several [precompiled contracts](/builders/pallets-precompiles/precompiles/){target=_blank}, which are Solidity interfaces that enable developers to access Substrate-based functionality through the Ethereum API, but circumventing the EVM. Although the precompiled contracts are designed to improve the developer experience, there can be some unintended consequences that must be considered.

This guide will outline and provide examples of some security considerations to be cognizant of when developing on Moonbeam.

## Arbitrary Code Execution {: #arbitrary-code-execution }

Arbitrary code execution in Solidity is the ability to execute code and call functions of other contracts using an arbitrary number of arguments of any type.

> A smart contract allows arbitrary execution of another contract when it allows a user to invoke the `call()` function and pass in arbitrary call data. The [`call()` function](https://solidity-by-example.org/call/){target=_blank} is made available through the [address data type in Solidity](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/latest/types.html#address){target=_blank}. When the `call()` function is invoked, the target contract is called using the arbitrary call data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A smart contract allows arbitrary execution of another contract when it allows a user to influence its own `call()` and pass in arbitrary call data and/or the `call()`s target. The [`call()` function](https://solidity-by-example.org/call/){target=_blank} is made available through the [address data type in Solidity](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/latest/types.html#address){target=_blank}. When the `call()` function is invoked, the target contract is called using the arbitrary call data.
```

Disregard or change as you want, what I'm getting at is:

* Clarity on which call is affected (it's Contract A in our example, not the EOA transaction call)
* Point out that issues can arise when the target is arbitrary/influence-able, it doesn't just have to be the call data

> An example of arbitrary code execution, in it's simplest form, can be seen in the following diagram.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Arbitrary code execution follows the pattern in the diagram below when `Contract A` allows a user to influence its call to `Contract B`.
```

This might help make it clear what `Contract A` must do "wrong" in order to have potential issues.

![Arbitrary code execution](/images/builders/get-started/eth-compare/security/security-1.png)

As previously mentioned, one major concern of arbitrarily executing code on Moonbeam is that Moonbeam has precompile contracts that can be called, which can be used to get around some protections that are typically available on Ethereum. To safely use arbitrary code execution on Moonbeam, you should consider the following, which **only applies to contracts that allow arbitrary code execution**:

> - Moonbeam [precompiled contracts](builders/pallets-precompiles/precompiles/){target=_blank} such as the Native ERC-20 precompile, XC-20 precompiles, and XCM-related precompiles allow users to manage and transfer assets without requiring access to the EVM. Instead, these actions are done using the Substrate API. So, if your contract holds native tokens or XC-20s and allows arbitrary code execution, these precompiles can be used to drain the balance of the contract, bypassing any security checks that are normally enforced by the EVM

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Moonbeam [precompiled contracts](builders/pallets-precompiles/precompiles/){target=_blank} such as the Native ERC-20 precompile, XC-20 precompiles, and XCM-related precompiles allow users to manage and transfer assets without requiring access to the EVM. Instead, these actions are done using native Substrate code. So, if your contract holds native tokens or XC-20s and allows arbitrary code execution, these precompiles can be used to drain the balance of the contract, bypassing any security checks that are normally enforced by the EVM
```

- Setting the value attribute of the transaction object to a fixed amount when using the `call()` function (for example, `call{value: 0}(...)`) can be bypassed by calling the native asset precompile and specifying an amount to transfer in the encoded call data

> - Providing the function selector for the function that you want to allow to be executed is considered safe, assuming that the function call is safe and does not call precompiles

Reviewer 2: Is this saying that the contract should provide the fn selector or that it's safe in some cases for the user to provide it? If the former, maybe say "hard coding the selector"?

Or instead of saying what's safe, say what isn't -- which I think is the combination of user-influence-able target (or any target that is our custom precompiles) and a fn selector.

> - Blacklisting target contracts (including precompiles) in the function that executes arbitrary call data is not considered safe, as other precompiles might be added in the future. Providing whitelisted target contracts in the function that executes the arbitrary call data is considered safe, assuming that the contracts being called are not precompiles, or that in the case they are, the contract making the call does not hold the native token or any XC-20

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Blacklisting target contracts (including precompiles) in the function that executes arbitrary call data is **not** considered safe, as other precompiles might be added in the future. Providing whitelisted target contracts in the function that executes the arbitrary call data is considered safe, assuming that the contracts being called are not precompiles, or that in the case they are, the contract making the call does not hold the native token or any XC-20
```

In the following sections, you'll learn about each of these security considerations through examples.

### Precompiles Can Override a Set Value {: #setting-a-value }

> On Ethereum, a smart contract that allows for arbitrary code execution could force the value of a call to be a specific amount (for example, `{value: 0}`), guaranteeing that only that amount of native currency would be sent with the transaction. Whereas on Moonbeam, setting the value of an arbitrary call can be overridden by calling the native ERC-20 precompile contract and transferring the native asset through the Substrate API. Since ERC-20s and XC-20s are not native assets, setting the value attribute doesn't provide any protection for these types of assets on Ethereum or Moonbeam.

Reviewer 2: Could be a good place for a link to related documentation on our erc20 precompiles

```
function getBytes(address _erc20Contract, address _arbitraryCallContract, address _to) public view returns (bytes memory) {
    // Load ERC-20 interface of contract
    IERC20 erc20 = IERC20(_erc20Contract);
    // Get amount to transfer
    uint256 amount = erc20.balanceOf(_arbitraryCallContract);
    // Build the encoded call data
    return abi.encodeWithSelector(IERC20.transfer.selector, _to, amount);
}
```

Once you have the encoded call data, you could make an arbitrary call to the [native ERC-20 precompile contract](builders/pallets-precompiles/precompiles/erc20){target=_blank}, set the value of the call to `0`, and pass in the call data in bytes:

```
function makeArbitraryCall(address _target, bytes calldata _bytes) public {
    // Value: 0 does not protect against native ERC-20 precompile calls or XCM precompiles
    (bool success,) = _target.call{value: 0}(_bytes);
    require(success);
}
```

> The value of `0` will be overridden by the amount to be transferred as specified in the encoded call data, which in this example is the balance of the contract.

Reviewer 2: It might be worth mentioning that we have a way to use our native currency as an ERC20, whereas there is no such thing in Ethereum. In other words:

* Ethereum provides only `value` as a way to transfer funds
* Moonbeam provides `value` and an ERC20-compatible precompile to move the native token

I think this is the fundamental reason this potential security issue arises.

    ```
    0x4ed3885e0000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000020000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000568656c6c6f000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000
    ```
6. Click on **transact** and confirm the transaction in MetaMask

![Execute the whitelisted function](/images/builders/get-started/eth-compare/security/security-7.png)

Once the transaction goes through, you can then verify that the message has been set to `hello` in the `SetMessage.sol` contract:

1. Expand the **SETMESSAGE** contract
2. Click on **get**
3. The response will appear right below the **get** button, which should be `hello`

![Verify the whitelisted function was executed](/images/builders/get-started/eth-compare/security/security-8.png)

To make sure that you cannot call any other function, you can repeat the previous steps to call the `whitelistFunctionSelector` function by taking the following steps:

1. Expand the **whitelistFunctionSelector** function
2. In the **_target** field, enter the contract address of the `SetMessage.sol` contract

> 3. In the **_bytes** field, you can enter any other ABI-encoded call data. For example, you can use the bytes from the previous example that called 

Reviewer 3: It might be useful to include an example of this in the same contract. For example:

```
contract SetMessage {
    string storedMessage;
    string nonWhitelistedMessage;

    function set(string calldata x) public {
        storedMessage = x;
    }

    function nonWhitelistedSet(string calldata x) public {
        nonWhitelistedMessage = x;
    }

    function get() public view returns (string memory) {
        return storedMessage;
    }
}
```

## Arbitrary Code Execution {: #arbitrary-code-execution }

> Arbitrary code execution in Solidity is the ability to execute code and call functions of other contracts using an arbitrary number of arguments of any type.

Reviewer 2: How about something like "A smart contract allows arbitrary execution of other contract code when it allows user-specified data when invoking a `call()`.

That probably needs a lot of work, but I think it includes some elements that you're trying to convey.

Specifically, I think we want to make it clear that we're talking about a smart contract making a call (as opposed to call from a EOA via a txn) in ways that are unintended.

Reviewer 2: Here's the pattern we really care about (in its simplest form):

```
EOA signs transaction -> calls contract A -> calls contract B
```

This is problematic any time `contract A` allows user-input to influence its call to `contract B` -- this is true in Ethereum proper, of course, but we define the additional caveats that are introduced by Moonbeam here.

^ really just me summarizing the problem. What I think is missing in the discussion of "arbitrary code execution" is clarity on the pattern (specifically A -> B with some user-influence).
